---
title: "Phoenix: An end-to-end AI powered Social Media analysis platform powering peacebuilding
efforts"
date: "2025-02-10T10:16:57Z"
description: "Phoenix is an open-source AI platform developed by Build Up and datavaluepeople to
aid peacebuilding through social media analysis. Launched in January 2025, it addresses challenges
like large data processing, limited technical expertise, and multi-language classification. Key
features include a user-friendly interface, secure authentication, data scraping, and multilingual
classification. Phoenix has already supported over 50 peacebuilders, processed terabytes of data,
and gained recognition at the Paris Peace AI Forum. A public-good platform, making advanced AI
tools accessible for conflict analysis of digital spaces. Phoenix exemplifies how collaboration and
ethical AI can drive global peacebuilding efforts."
author: benjamin
linkedin_link:
hackernews_link:
---
In a world where social media deeply shapes public opinion, data-driven insights can play a pivotal
role in preventing conflict and fostering peace. That’s exactly what [Build
Up](https://howtobuildup.org/phoenix/), a nonprofit dedicated to supporting peacebuilders—sought to
accomplish through the Project Phoenix. Developed in partnership with datavaluepeople, Phoenix is
an open-source (code repository [here](https://gitlab.com/howtobuildup/phoenix)), end-to-end AI
platform designed to help peacebuilders and mediators analyze social media data, informing
effective strategies for conflict prevention and resolution. Since January 2025 phoenix has been
open to the public and you can apply for a Phoenix account,
[here](https://howtobuildup.org/phoenix/).

In this article, we’ll explore the challenges Build Up faced, the solutions datavaluepeople
provided, and how Phoenix is transforming social media analysis for peacebuilding around the globe.

***

## **The challenge: Leveraging social media for peacebuilding**

Peacebuilders and mediators increasingly look to social media to gauge public sentiment and
identify emerging tensions. Yet collecting and analyzing massive volumes of data from diverse
platforms can be overwhelming. Several roadblocks stood in the way:

1. **Data overload**: Peacebuilders needed a reliable way to gather, organize, and filter vast
   streams of social media data in real-time.

2. **Limited technical expertise**: Many peacebuilders aren’t data scientists, so any AI-driven
   platform had to be intuitive and accessible.

3. **Multi-language support**: Conflicts often span regions with multiple languages, including
   those that traditional analytics tools rarely handle well.

4. **Open-source requirement**: Build Up wanted a project open to contributors worldwide,
   facilitating collaboration and continuous improvement.

***

## **The solution: Phoenix—An AI platform for peacebuilders**

Working closely with Build Up, datavaluepeople created Phoenix: a powerful, user-friendly system
that addresses each challenge in a single, comprehensive platform.

### **Modern web console**

Built with React and Next.js, Phoenix’s web console offers a straightforward interface accessible
from any device with an internet connection. It allows peacebuilders to easily configure analyses,
explore data sources, and review insights without advanced technical skills.

### **Authentication and dashboarding**

Phoenix’s custom authentication system ensures secure access, while its Superset-based dashboards
make data visualization highly flexible. Users can build interactive charts and graphs that help
surface trends or spikes in conflict-related discussions—providing clarity on community sentiment
and emerging risks.

### **Data scraping integration**

By integrating with data-scraping platforms like Apify, Phoenix streamlines large-scale data
collection from social media and other online sources. It lets users define specific parameters for
what data to capture, helping them focus on the most relevant content while honouring platform and
data privacy policies.

### **Classification systems for all languages**

A standout feature is Phoenix’s multilingual classification engine, which manages high- and
low-resource languages alike. This ensures peacebuilders can quickly identify posts of
interest—crucial when sifting through huge volumes of potentially conflict-related material.

***

## **How it works**

1. **Gather**: Peacebuilders specify keywords, locations, or other criteria for collecting data
   from social media and other sources.

2. **Classify**: Phoenix’s machine learning models process the incoming data, identifying critical
   topics, trends, and sentiments.

3. **Explore**: Users start with a standard dashboard and tailor visualizations to track regional
   tensions or other priorities.

4. **Collaborate & share**: Being open-source, Phoenix allows contributors worldwide to enhance its
   capabilities—ensuring continued evolution and impact.

***

## **The results: A global impact on peacebuilding**

Since launch, Phoenix has proven invaluable for peacebuilders worldwide, yielding several
noteworthy outcomes:

1. **Global reach**: Versions v1 and v2 of Phoenix have supported more than 50 peacebuilders,
   allowing them to analyze social media discourses and develop targeted interventions. Including
   being one of the 31 of 770 projects accepted into the [Paris Peace
   Forum](https://www.elysee.fr/en/sommet-pour-l-action-sur-l-ia/2024/10/24/call-for-projects-from-the-paris-peace-forum-a-growing-interest-in-addressing-global-challenges-through-ai).

2. **Massive data handling at low cost**: Phoenix has processed terabytes of social media data,
   managing the scale more commonly associated with large tech firms than small nonprofits.

3. **Real insights**: By revealing the narratives driving online discussion, Phoenix enables
   quicker, more evidence-based decision-making. Case studies can be found in the [Phoenix
   manual](https://www.notion.so/howtobuildup/Case-studies-cd8ace41995a479a820c3f722532440c).

4. **Public good platform launch**: Scheduled for 2025, Phoenix will be offered as a public-good
   platform, bringing large-scale data analytics to even more communities and organizations. Read
   more [here](https://howtobuildup.org/phoenix/).

## **Conclusion**

Phoenix stands as a transformative example of how collaboration and user-centric innovation can
address complex global challenges. By combining Build Up’s peacebuilding expertise with
datavaluepeople’s technical prowess, the platform empowers mediators to analyze social media data
at scale, uncovering critical insights that inform conflict prevention strategies. Its ability to
process terabytes of multilingual data, deliver real-time visualizations, and adapt to diverse
regions has already made it indispensable to peacebuilders in over 50 communities. With plans to
launch as a public-good platform by 2025, Phoenix is poised to extend its impact further,
democratizing access to advanced AI tools for organizations committed to fostering peace.

Beyond peacebuilding, Phoenix offers a blueprint for SMEs and other entities grappling with
data-intensive challenges. Its scalable infrastructure handles explosive data growth, while its
modular, open-source architecture allows organizations to customize solutions without reinventing
the wheel. The platform’s intuitive design lowers barriers for non-technical users, and its
transparency builds trust—critical for aligning AI tools with organizational values. Phoenix
demonstrates that ethical, impactful AI is not exclusive to tech giants; with a focus on
adaptability, collaboration, and accessibility, even resource-constrained teams can leverage data
to drive smarter decisions, innovate products, and engage communities. By prioritizing these
principles, Phoenix charts a path for organizations worldwide to harness AI not just as a tool, but
as a force for equitable progress.

**Ready to explore what AI can do for your organization?** Contact us today and let’s take your
data-driven vision to the next level.
